IF ONLY IT ALLOWS 
Qum is not so bad for pupils, But only if the soft Sangak (Bread) and Kabab allows. 
The theologian school is open but, If the “KhaneFarangi” manner allows it. 
Some of the Sheiks’ figures are sanctimonious, If the fascinating sunglasses allow. 
10 P.M is the time for our study, If doze sleep, and nap allow!

INJUSTICE
To whom we make our plea for Reza shah’s injustice,
To whom we express our complain about this devil.
When there was breath, he prevented us to wail,
But now there is no breath to wail.

THE UNIQUE IDOL
Happy the day when the tavern’s hermit we become,
Of the wisdom’s limitation I jump out and mad become.
We will break the mirror, philosophy and mysticism,
Becoming alien of the idol house of this caravan.
We will become free from monastery, school and convent,
Renounce to the existence and noble we will be.
We will leave ourselves and go to the beloved,
Being fascinated by her facecandle and the moth we will be.
Let us ingnore the chains totally and grains wholly,
We will fond of the snare of the unique idol.
We will remove wisdom’s intoxication from our mind and come round,
To gain consciousness from the intoxicating globet.

THE PERFECT SUN
Queue up oh the rogues, the leader of the heart has come,
The life from far away, stage to stage, to her has come.
The nightingale, upon the branches is enthusiastically due to see her flapping to see her,
The rose entangled in mud, due to her disunion.
Tell Sinā Mountain “The period of unconsciousness is over,”
The Moses of justice after the wrong command has come.
Shout at the ignorant based owl totally,
From behind the mountain the perfect sun has come.
Tell the devils that the period of sensual gratification is over,
The life for you, deadly poison, has become.
The problem solving beloved from the fourth sky,
With the Jesus's aspiration for solving the problems has come.
Don't worry oh the sorrowstricken, don't worry,
To rescue you Noah the sailor, to the coast, has come.

THE CANDLE OF EXISTENCE
Will I happen to leave this residence one day?
I fly from this world and within the eternity world I nest.
Would it come that time that within the beloved's candle being?
Burntfeather and wings I consume like moth in the night.
I turn away from the tavern and the monastery,
To the soil of the cupbearer of the tavern I genuflect,
It was not aquired by the Sufi and Sheikhs preaching,
To a frenzied and lovesick idod I approach.
Your tress and your lip’s mole are seed and snare how;
The bird of the heart from these snare and seed can I release.
May it be that from this idol temple I expel,
I leave this strange house blind fast flapping.


DESCRIPTION OF DISHEVELED
I want pain, cure I don’t want,
I want sorrow, song I don’t want.
I am in love, in love and involved with you,
For this illness cure I don’t want.
I accept your cruelty heartily,
From you abandoning cruelty, I don’t want.
From you unfaithfulness is faithfulness,
Therefore, faithfulness I don’t want.
You are my “Sa­fa” & Marwah,
Marveh and Safa I don’t want.
Sufi is unaware of the beloved’s union,
Unpleasant sufi I don’t want.
You are my prayer, you are my recitation,
Recitation, thinking and praying I don’t want.
Wherever I turn you are Qeble,
The false Qiblah I don’t want.
Whoever you behold is your devotee,
I am myself a devotee, the devotee I don’t want.
The whole world is lit by your visage,
You are visible, the footprint I don’t want.

THE BELOVED’S FRAGNANCE
We don’t know we are all in love with him,
Wandering and intoxicated by that beautiful face we are all.
We are unaware of both worlds, not knowing that we,
Looking for her glace, are all wandering.
The dwellers of the tavern of love we are continiously,
From the very beginning intoxicated by that rare goblet we are all.
Whatever we smell, is from the garden of the previous day,
It is the beloved’s fragnance that we have smelt and are all smelling.
Except the beloved’s visage there is no visage and beauty,
It is her separation that is discussed by us all.
We don’t know that puzzled and wandering all,
We are looking for what is in front of us.

THE MIDNIGHT SUN
O beautiful who are both covered and without cover,
Oh you who thousands of times appear and again disappear.
Oh! the midnight sun and the midday moon,
Oh, the distant star who are nor the sun and the moon neither.
The universe is your pioneer and the sun your shadow,
The tress of the sun is your delicate tent's binder.
The souls of the holies due to your separation are consuming,
The hooris' hearts are all burning with your absence.
You are the real beauty and the legend of glory,
You are the endless sea and the world is a mirage all.
Is it possible that you glance at us!
Thus with the opening wings we move out of this cage.
Oh you whose appearance gives beauty to the beautiful,
Oh you whose coquettish glance causes all Sheikh and all the youth to perish,
The Friend’s eyes have made me mad,
Both worlds' prosperity be sacrificed for this being out of order.

THE COURT OF BEAUTY
Wherever you step His beauty clear there is,
Wherever you put your head the place of the worship of that beauty (the real Beloved) there is.
Everyone is wandering about (the real Beloved)'s dishevelled hair,
In the grief of His visage's separation, so much fervency and clamour there is.
All the beautiful genuflected to your beauty,
What sort of turturing is this that for the aged and the youth a treasure it is?
The lovers are the highranking figures of the spritual world,
Being Proud is the one who at your court of beauty the beggar is.
The one who took shelter in your place, is away from boasting,
The neglected of the worlds never think of us?
Take off this stained cloak and break this idol,
Settle down yourself at the love's gate which itself the Qiblah indicator is.

THE WET PETAL
Oh the hoori’s face that have been made a wet petal,
Why your heart has been made of hard granite?
The son of the clay with such beauty and tenderness is queer!
Your father, from the paradise and not from the clay, has been made.
The fruit of being beautiful is a sweet kiss,
Oh you the sypress, you’ve been made for your fruit.

THE CUP OF ANNIHILATION
As far as there is in the world the trace of you,
As far as there is in the heaven the sound of your voice.
As far as there is cup, intoxication, imbibing and love,
As far as the mosque, idol temple and monastery is the place of you,
As far as there is a trace of your pleasant speech,
As far as there is a trace of you and the claim of you.
As far as there is between the terms, a term of you,
As far as there is a flourish of you and of the utterance of you.
Whatever deserves love and loving, never
No a trace of your annihilation is seen.

DIVINATION
Tear out the turban of asceticism, as the spring has arrived,
Go to the Magianelder and consult.
Worth making a rosary out of a single grape,
For going to the tavern try divination.

GLAD TIDINGS
I took a cup from a drunk's hand,
Oh God! What an intoxtication, and what a hand!
Good tidings for the shrine’s select,
That an idol worshiper intends to go to Mecca.

THE NIGHTINGALE’S WAIL
The meadow smells of spring,
From the cloud a fountain head contained of the eyes.
The nightingale wailed due to the separation of the beloved,
The bud cried instead of hundred thousands nightingales.

THE CURATIVE WINE
Oh cupbearer! Open the door of the tavern to me,
From lecture and discussion from hypocricy and asceticism make me needless.
Put on my way a strand of your curly hair,
Of science, mosque, lecture and prayer rid me.
Davidlike, singing and playing bring forth the goblet,
Unawareof the up and down and the pain of status indifferent me make.
Unveil the beloved’s beautiful face and tress,
Alien of Ka‘bah and the Land of Hijāz.
Fill up brimfully my jar from that pure wine,
From “Safa” turn the heart towards the plundering idol.
I feel miserable due to the beloved’s separation,
To the curative cup of wine invite me.

THE MYSTERY REVEALING (Part 1)
Discontinue! this nonsense discontinue,
How long cease selfpraising.
The devoted are taciturn!
Take off this hypocricy garment, discontinue.
You are guilty and God is aware of it,
Oh deceptive! Pretence of piety, discontinue.
God is rich, go to Him,
Stop begging from the created ones.
All worship prayed by you is dualism,
You! the polytheismcleansing, discontinue

THE MYSTERY REVEALING (Part 2)
Daulism exists inside you,
Claiming of dualismcleanser discontinue.
You, the satanstricken, and the God’s love!
You won’t get anywhere, discontinue.
Better than your inside is your outside,
My dear! Polytheismincreasing, discontinue.
The followers of devil are not God believers,
Oh the pen! secret revealing, discontinue.

THE WINE OF LOVE
I am a tavern dweller, about the beloved don’t ask me,
I am dumb, don't ask the distressed dumb to speak.
Being busy with my own blindness and absoleteness,
From such a blind one, vision and sight don’t ask.
Your lovesick eyes have made me sick,
Except the delirium, no other words from a patient like me don’t ask.
With the calandar don’t communicate, and if you communicate never,
Sagacity, verse and tradition ask.
I am intoxicated with the wine of your lover, from the intoxicated,
Noble advice uttered by the wise don’t ask.

THE LOVE LIGHT
If the love opens its wings, the sovereign of the world love is,
If love appears in this world and existence, love the sovereign is.
If one day it appears from its own hidding place,
Welldone! that coast to coast love the sovereign is.
There is no particle in the world devoid of love,
Blessed is He who is rulling over the whole universe.
If from the hidden curtain his face appears one day,
The whole people will find out that in presence and absence love the sovereign is.
As far as you are veiled soulfully and bodily,
You can’t see yourself that upon the soul and the body the sovereign love is.
It goes without saying that the whole world nothing but the love is,
The Majesty who over the states [Present and absent] sovereign the love is.

REFUGE
The rectifier of the dervish’s claim You are
The peace maker of this broken heart You are
The heavy storm made me drown
The guide to my savior arc You are

ELIAS THE WAYFARER
What happened that here your path way became,
Did the sigh of me, the broken heart one, become the Elias of your way?
The highly position of you, the Solomon, and this poor cottage!
May God help me as if due to your mistake it was.
Now that you have come and joined somebody like me,
Turning the cottage atomosphere into a palace, due to your support as.
The night whose darkness was much more than the smoke of my sorrow
Became like a sunny day for the light of your face.
Tell the sheikh that tonight the paradise is to be offered,
My portion vividly your agreement or your disagreement became.
You are the king of the beauty assembly and Hindī the lovelorn one,
Whatever from the life exists, the soil for your court became.

ADDICTED TO LOVE
Zephyr! if you pass through the abode of the beloved,
Tell him not to genuflect except upon the feet of the beloved.
I don’t genuflect unless upon the feet of the beloved,
I don’t die unless for the sake of the beloved.
You consumed my hear by your disunion,
Judge! Were it the friend's deserve?
Majnoon fell in love, but he was not so involved as I was,
I wish no one would be addicted to beloved like me.
FREE FROM THE WORLDFREE FROM THE WORLD
The indigence is an honour if free from the world is,
The one who forgets oneself, what sorrows can have?
The destiny on that day appears that the night of which,
The beloved up to the morning as companion with one is.
The joy of the dervish the sufi is not able to comprehend,
Take wine from the hand of the idol that a confidant is.
The parrot of the garden of affection does not go to the owl's nest,
The hawk of the paradise, how the markeddog can be.
Either take this lost heart under your shelter,
Or release it to wander round the world.

FOR AHMAD
Ahmad  the son of Mokhtar,
As to his Hamid will be looked after.
Fātī, from the empyrean, is of the Fātīma’s womb,
Fātīma is being supported by the Heaven.
Hasan, this fruit of the Hasan’s tree,
Be his Muhsin permanent company.
‘Alī is from the garden of the ‘Alī dynasty,
“‘Alī the dignity” is the motto.
Five of the Ahmad’s offspring,
Are the intermediary of the Eight and Four.
My daughter asked me for a new poem,
I compose poetaster to be memorable.

THE UNION NIGHT
Such a night I am in the bossom of the shining moon,
From whatever in both worlds exists disinclined I am.
Stop the sun's shining for a while, oh, morning,
That the moon has put its head upon my lap.
Thousand cups of the elixir of life, I had ou of it,
From that lips, but yet like Alexander thursty I am.
Oh God! What mystery has been hidden within love?
That the Beloved has slept in my arm, but disorderly I am.
I don’t know whether it is for the night of union or the dawn of separation,
That like the nightingale singing I am.
If a thousand years pass from this union night,
By its delicate tale the nightingale I am.
Don’t read the tradition of your union night oh! Hindī
As of the eyes of the jealous afraid I am.

THE LIFE’S CUP
I had intended to sacrifice my life to the beloved,
I have no life of my own to sacrifice her.
I am in the arms of an idol, a cup of wine give,
So that out of it to the Yosef of Kanan a reward I give.
When I become the servant at the door of the wineselling idol,
To the commandor of both worlds commands I will give.
About my soul’s dishevelled due to her disunion, ask not,
For that dishevelled tress, head and soul I will give.
Oh Ascetic! don’t talk about the paradise’s garden and hour’s visage,
The curve of her tress for a hundred gardens of paradise I don’t give.
Oh the Sheikh of altar! You and the promise of the paradise,
The beloved’s coquetry cheap I ought not to give.

THE GOOD TIDING OF UNION
The knot of the curly tress of the beloved was undone,
The old pious like the young lover was disgraced.
I drank the wine drop from your glass of generousity,
It poured a fire into my soul which soul abrasive became.
Forget the Friend’s story for in his thought,
I will be affected with mental desease.
The good tidings of union reached the rogues of the tavern,
Suddenly the clamour, the dance and the joy it arose.
The fire His love, cast my soul and my life,
My soul left my body behind and Khalīllike became.

REMOVE THE VEIL
Untill you donot call, “I am the truth, selfish you are”
About His mystry unknown You are
Remove you veil in between
With having the veil still on the way You are

THE ELIXIR OF LIFE
You affable height in the beauty garden,
Is a sypress which cannot be found in Kashmar.
In my mirror the elixir of life,
Is not cleaner than sweetie.
The head which is not your polo ball,
I hit the mallet as it is not head.
If except you the seed of love grows,
I’ll uproot it as it's not fruitful.
Your love’s sapling within the Hindī’s heart,
Will grow nothing but sigh and regret.

THE SAGE’S CARESS
Kiss the hand of the sage that excommunicated me,
Caress the “Muhtasib” who chained me.
Since then I have become a hermit at the door of the elderly magians,
Who through giving me a sip of wine from the both worlds I get fed up.
I don’t drink the water of “Kawthar” and avoid currying favour with Paradise,
Oh friend! Your face’s light world conqueror made me.
Appease the darvish who from the beginning's mystery,
Unveiled the evil, made me aware of destiny.
I boast the tavern elder who through his power,
Made me mortal, made me extinct and conquered me.
I am the servant at the door of the sage who woth his caress,
Made me negligent of myself and totally changed me.

THE WET PETAL
Oh the hoori’s face that have been made a wet petal,
Why your heart has been made of hard granite?
The son of the clay with such beauty and tenderness is queer!
Your father, from the paradise and not from the clay, has been made.
The fruit of being beautiful is a sweet kiss,
Oh you the sypress, you’ve been made for your fruit.

ORBIT
The garden face plundered my belongings,
Its intoxicated eyes increased my intoxication.
By its amourous glance set fire into my soul,
It squandered my obstinacy and my objectness.
She scattered her twisting tress,
Bent my back and my tricks.
The time when she ran towards me with the goblet of wine,
Uprooted my being and my jubilation.

THE JESUS’S BREATHLIKE LOVE
The nightingale due to the flower’s beauty a Davidlike song performed,
Within the sad heart its song caused recovery.
The cupbearer to the soul of the lover from the sun's cup,
Whatever the fire of Nimrod to the soul of Khalil did.
I am the slave of that Beloved's love which is like Messias' breath,
That the felicity of her step [coming] burnt my existence.
About our distress whatever you heard is absurd,
Annihilating none by no one can be performed.
I boast of that passionate beloved with whose morning wine,
The unveilar of the face of the beloved and the pious was.
Look at the Friend’s power for out of His favor
He made the drunk a believer.

THE COQUETTISH IDOL
I sometimes pass by your abode knavelike,
Hoping to glance at you out of my eyes corner.
If the piety rosary and hypocrisy rugprayer,
Are not worthy, I shall give my wealth for the wine
From now on I won’t attend the school,
Unless in search for a coquettish idol.
Through the mosque’s area I won’t pass unless,
I make my way to the wineseller’s abode.

ALĪ
I am free from the two worlds in the light of ‘Alī’s face,
I feel young by the friend’s jar and his twisted hair.
Following the beloved I pass all the way from the earth to the heaven,
As I recollect ‘Alī’s eyebrow in tavern

PAWN FOR THE WINE
Spring has arrived let’s pawn our prayerrug for the wine,
Opposed to willing of hypocrisy Sheikh we try such deed.

THE COAST OF BEING
I am in love with your face, leave the heart of mine,
I swear by God that only your face and nothing else solves my problem.
Your abode's love, has been kneaded with creation of us,
The love of your face has been mingled with the water and clay of mine.
There is nothing in our gathering but to remember you,
We wish for nothing but to reach you.
Tear out the curtain of rays between you and me,
So that your moonlike face appears in the heart of mine,
Appear upon the mountain of my heart of dear beloved,
So as to be enlivened like Moses the ignorant heart of mine.
His features is manifested in both worlds overally,
So as to make vain all the idle life of mine.
The world is the sea wave, there is no coast, no sea,
A drop of the sorrow of your sea became the coast of mine.
As the Khalīl of the world has overshadowed the sun and the moon,
The beloved’s appearance isn't like me and my demise.

ENTANGLED KA‘BAH
You are the thorn on my way oh sheikh go,
Oh the conivet, rogue, don’t block my way, go.
You are my guide, oh! the immature guide,
Oh! the traitor sufi don’t stand in front of me go.
Oh, you the one who is involved in his own desires, you the monastery dweller!
Leave the row of the beloved’s face lovers, go.
Oh you! the calandarlike, holding wine in hand, wearing patched garments upon the shoulder,
Take off and leave the polytheism soak, and go.
The house of Ka‘bah whose servant you are now,
Oh! You the crook, the satanic servant from this palce go!
Oh! You holding pen in your hand, critic, dirty felon,
Put down this pen stop tormenting people, go.

THE CUP OF ANNIHILATION
As far as there is in the world the trace of you,
As far as there is in the heaven the sound of your voice.
As far as there is cup, intoxication, imbibing and love,
As far as the mosque, idol temple and monastery is the place of you,
As far as there is a trace of your pleasant speech,
As far as there is a trace of you and the claim of you.
As far as there is between the terms, a term of you,
As far as there is a flourish of you and of the utterance of you.
Whatever deserves love and loving, never
No a trace of your annihilation is seen.

THE NIGHTINGALE’S MESSAGE
The spring breeze kissed coyly the grass' lips,
The jonquil whispered to the corncopy hundred mysteries.
The nightingales upon the rose branch to the lovers sent a message,
To join the tavern, which is hospitable to the lovers

THE SEA OF UNION
I am intoxicated by your wine and I have a desire,
I have been drowned within your union sea but still needy.
The ray of your sunlike light is everywhere,
Searching in the holy Shrine and the idoltemple how odd it seems

MAD ABOUT EYES
Remembering your face I came out of home,
Observing the mad one about your eyes, I was mad about home.
For meeting the moonlike in Sheikh’s presence,
I needed a pebbled rosary.

THE UNIQUE IDOL
Happy the day when the tavern’s hermit we become,
Of the wisdom’s limitation I jump out and mad become.
We will break the mirror, philosophy and mysticism,
Becoming alien of the idol house of this caravan.
We will become free from monastery, school and convent,
Renounce to the existence and noble we will be.
We will leave ourselves and go to the beloved,
Being fascinated by her facecandle and the moth we will be.
Let us ingnore the chains totally and grains wholly,
We will fond of the snare of the unique idol.
We will remove wisdom’s intoxication from our mind and come round,
To gain consciousness from the intoxicating globet.

THE SAFETY LAND
In this valley, a sage I am looking for,
I have lost the way, a guid I am looking for,
Of the torn paper of mysticism there is no news,
Of the rogue's hidden place some news I am looking for.
There was no use of the patched garment, prayerug and the position,
Of the rosegarden of her visage some fruit I am looking for.
There is no safety in this safe land,
In this safety land for a tree I am looking.
I left the tavern, idoltemple, and mosque,
Along the path of the love of your face, I am looking for a passerby.
I proceed a journey from nothingness towards everything,
I am treading the path step by step and looking for a companion.
You had said the love way is a dangerous way,
I'm in love that's why I'm looking for a dangerous way.
Within this ancient monastery my wings and feathers were scattered,
For my own shelter, wings and feathers I am looking for.

THE SLEEPING HEART
Your eyes where? The illuminating the world sun where?
The beloved’s face remembering where, the sleeping heart where?
With this earthen figure you won’t be celistial,
Oh friend! The clay where and the God’s dignity where?

THE CONFIDANT
Due to the separation of your moonlike face we are being consumed,
How long do we compromise and be consumed with this teasing sorrow?
Your separation will be never finished so that you can appear,
In all ages you are in comfort and we are around the needs.
The day will come when you open the door and unveil,
That we sacrifice our lives for you.
If through the hint a promise is given by the beloved,
Till the after life we will become ecstatic and we are enjoying.
If only I imagine that there would be a shelter in your abode,
Neither towards the idol temple nor towards Hijāz we will set off.
From the hidden curve, hidden from the aliens,
Pour wine into our cup as we are confidant.

SEA OF THE EXISTENCE
I involved in your love I wish any remedy had not been,
I am not looking for welfare I wish no welfare there were.
Born of the names has nothing to do with the paradise dweller,
Within the bend of the paradise I would stay if there wasn't a satan.
Fly above the angle, leave the territory of existence,
Human being is not the one who better than the angle flies.
Come out of the well oh Yousef to become a king,
Though coming out of this well is not easy were not.
Take the cup from the cupbearer and give up the world,
One who gave up his life will get rid of the chains of the world.
I am in love, the lover who is the only one to know the pain of love,
I am drown within the sea of love and a sailor like Noah, there is not.

THE BURDEN OF SAFEKEEPING
I want the sorrow that the sympathizer of which to be you,
I want a heart whose heartravisher to be you.
The worlds is worthless,
If my beloved, if the beloved of mine is you.
I will kiss my gallows tree happily,
If you are on the foot of the gallows.
I’ll give my head and my soul to the illness,
If you are my nurse.
Oh Friend! I will become the standardbearer of the world,
At the day when you are my serdar.
My life reaches the curved bow,
As the sun for my dark night will be you.
I stand the burden of safekeeping sorrowfuly,
The confidant of my mysteries will be you.

THE CURATIVE WINE
Oh cupbearer! Open the door of the tavern to me,
From lecture and discussion from hypocricy and asceticism make me needless.
Put on my way a strand of your curly hair,
Of science, mosque, lecture and prayer rid me.
Davidlike, singing and playing bring forth the goblet,
Unawareof the up and down and the pain of status indifferent me make.
Unveil the beloved’s beautiful face and tress,
Alien of Ka‘bah and the Land of Hijāz.
Fill up brimfully my jar from that pure wine,
From “Safa” turn the heart towards the plundering idol.
I feel miserable due to the beloved’s separation,
To the curative cup of wine invite me.

KAWTHAR
Oh friend! By the Kawthar I am sitting thirsty,
Beside me you are, I am restless by your separation.
My days and nights passed with you,
I am living day and night away from your beautiful face.

THE COQUETTISH IDOL
I sometimes pass by your abode knavelike,
Hoping to glance at you out of my eyes corner.
If the piety rosary and hypocrisy rugprayer,
Are not worthy, I shall give my wealth for the wine
From now on I won’t attend the school,
Unless in search for a coquettish idol.
Through the mosque’s area I won’t pass unless,
I make my way to the wineseller’s abode.

THE BELOVED’S FRAGRANCE
We don’t know we are all in love with him,
Wandering and intoxicated by that beautiful face we are all.
We are unaware of both worlds, not knowing that we,
Looking for her glace, are all wandering.
The dwellers of the tavern of love we are continiously,
From the very beginning intoxicated by that rare goblet we are all.
Whatever we smell, is from the garden of the previous day,
It is the beloved’s fragnance that we have smelt and are all smelling.
Except the beloved’s visage there is no visage and beauty,
It is her separation that is discussed by us all.
We don’t know that puzzled and wandering all,
We are looking for what is in front of us.

THE MYSTERY REVEALING
Discontinue! this nonsense discontinue,
How long cease selfpraising.
The devoted are taciturn!
Take off this hypocricy garment, discontinue.
You are guilty and God is aware of it,
Oh deceptive! Pretence of piety, discontinue.
God is rich, go to Him,
Stop begging from the created ones.
All worship prayed by you is dualism,
You! the polytheismcleansing, discontinue.
Daulism exists inside you,
Claiming of dualismcleanser discontinue.
You, the satanstricken, and the God’s love!
You won’t get anywhere, discontinue.
Better than your inside is your outside,
My dear! Polytheismincreasing, discontinue.
The followers of devil are not God believers,
Oh the pen! secret revealing, discontinue.

THE WINE OF PRESENCE
In seeing his features oh! The elder! Help me,
Help, be kind, and sympathize.
Never will I be disappointed upon your abode,
With a glance, to the grieved one’s, do a favour.
Let’s with a lap of the lovetavern’s wine,
Make me unconscious and ready for sobriety.
If you avoid doing a grace and don’t give me a shelter,
Act coquetry, start oppressing and coyness do.
I am in love, a lover, involved and entangled with you,
Take care of the lover, do a favour.
You and your own prayerrug, I and my own cup,
To me the intoxicated one, do whatever you want to.
If you dislike caressing us kindly,
Adopt a harsh way and do harm.

THE SOUL’S GARDEN
To whom do I say my heart’s sorrow that you are the sympathic of mine,
If the whole world are against me, you are the beloved of mine.
I won’t approach anybody I will appeal to no one,
As long as you are my dream, as far as you are the supporter of mine.
I am about to set off for your abode, there is no guide,
Nothing to worry about as you are the guide of mine.
I won’t approach the lawn, nor will I go to the garden,
You are my meadow you are the garden of mine.
I am patient, there is neither a physician nor a nurse,
I am glad that you are both the physician and the nurse of mine.
I am the consumed lover there is no aid,
You are my aid you are the beloved of mine.

CARAVAN OF LOVE
You don't know our distraughtness misery,
Of our wrong doings so vividly you are not aware.
The lover’s caravan departed while being intoxticated,
If they left “there isnot” for “BUT” you are not aware of.
Of our indigency and our cruelty you are not aware,
Of the lightheartedness of the noble lovelorn you are not aware.
They forgot themselves to find the beloved,
While being in the cage, you are not aware of phoenix’s nest.
Arise, break this cage loosen these shackles,
You don't know the human’s stage beyond “LA”.
You gained nothing from your life except quarrelling in vain,
As if from humanity excep this you know nothing.

THE CONFIDANT OF HEART
I reveal my heart’s sorrow as you are the beloved of mine,
In grief and happiness, in sorrow and pain, you are the aid of mine.
In both worlds except your roseface there is no aid of mine,
Unveil your face to me as you are the sympathetic to me.
Your lovesick eyes oh, the intoxicated one! made me sick,
Put your feet upon my eyes as you are the nurse of mine.
There is no confidant as to put poultice upon my injury,
Except you oh friend! that you are the confidant of mine.
To whom do I moan of your sad glance?
To whom do I say that you are the source of the torment of mine.
Loosen your curly hair and dance!
Swear to God that you are my beloved, my beloved, the beloved of mine.

THE BELOVED’S COQUETRY
Except the abode of the beloved nowhere I have,
Except the soil of your door no desire there is in my mind.
At the door of the tavern, idol temple, mosque and the monastery,
I genuflect to attract your attention.
By the sheikh’s speech and the school no problem was solved,
Glance! To solve our problems.
The dervish and sufi so much boasted selfishly,
Manifest, so that abolish I and we from my heart.
I am not, noexistence, that existence exists in His annihilation,
You pay attention to the naught as the naught am I.
Those of perceptive and joyful ones that I was looking for,
From the banquet organizer witness no song heard I.
The hermit of that curtaindweller I am day and night,
So that by her glance a drop can be changed into a sea!

THE SANCTUM OF THE INTOXICATED
In the dervish’s circle no purity we saw,
Within the monastery from Him no sound we heard.
At school from the beloved no books we read,
Out of minaret, from the beloved, we heard nothing.
Inside the books no veil we saw,
By studying pages nowhere we got to.
Within the tavern the whole life we wasted,
Within the friend’s ring there was no cure nor aid.
Within the lover’s circle I'll go to find,
From the beloved’s garden a breeze, a trace.
This selfish boasting is totally derived from wisdom and the wise,
Within the drunk's sanctum there is no I, nor we.

THE ALTAR OF THOUGHT
You must ignore the countries and peoples to become soul,
Ignoring the life then you deserve being accepted by the benevolent.
Her tress can not be achieved free,
For this purpose your head and your feet must polo become.
When can you perform your prayer in the altar of her eyebrows?
For ages you must wander within this thought.
On the way to her lip’s mole the cup of pain must be brimful,
You have to increase the pain and not to look for a cure.
In the desire of her intoxicated eyes within the row of the city’s drunks,
Dance joyfully and become united.
This is the love course and through annihilation possible becomes possible,
Enthusiastically you must be moth and burnt.

THE CHILD OF THE COURSE
Oh the elder of the course do us a favoure,
We are young in this course, guide us.
We have been decayed and got nowhere,
Oh beloved in this way, be commander.

EXPECTATION
In this tavern I cry due to the friend's disunion,
I find no helper that due to the disunion cry I will.
Hue and cry that in our assembly there are no rogues,
So that, I complain, explain the injustice, to him.
I was given happiness, sadness, faithfulness, and unjustness,
Pleasantly, for whatever I was given, curry favour I will.
I am in love, the love of your visage and nothing else,
The pain of your disunion I burden.
In your grief oh my wild flower, oh my Khosrow,
I bear the Majnūn's oppression and Farhad's tamper I carry.
I'm fed up with the life without you, while you are with me,
It is a rare secret that to the master I will take.
Many years have been passing, many events will come,
From the midkhordad I expect the relief.

THE ASSEMBLY OF ROGUES
I wish one day the dust upon her obode I will be,
Giving up the life distress of her visage I will be.
The animating cup from her generous hand I will take,
Ignoring the two world's, involuing her tress I will be.
I'll put my head upon her foot, kissing it till I pass away,
Up to the Resurrection Day with her Jug intoxicated I will be.
Like a moth I will be consumed around her candle forever,
Fascinated, like the drunk, by her comely visage I will be.
The day will come when in the assembly of the intoxicated rogues,
The confidant of all her secret mysteries I will be.
If my own yousef [friend] doesn't call on me,
Like Jacob distressed by his smell I will be.

THE SPRING OF SOUL
Arriving spring, youth I revive after having become old,
Sitting biside the beloved from my own life advantage I take.

TEARING CLOTHES
I desire a cup of wine from the Beloved's hand,
To whom do I reveal this secret, where to I carry this sadness?
I lost my life to the disunion of the Beloved,
I am the moth round the candle and the wild rue on fire.
Like a moth within this cage I nearly passed away,
Release me so that joyfully I go.
This dirty patched garment and the hypocricy prayer rug,
At the tavern's door I rend, Can it be?
If from the jug of love a sip is given by the Beloved,
Drunkenly I pull soul out of existence's cloak.
Though I am old, with a glance I will become young,
Do me a favour, so that from the world's hut I go out.

THE REFLECTION OF LOVE
Oh my beloved! Lack of the friend's desire lifeless I am,
I am painful, I am in love, no cure I have.

THE BREEZE OF LOVE
Behold me that an amberlike face I have,
A heart towards the face of the charming Beloved I have.
From the love cup I tasted the purity and verity wine,
To the tavern's jar, I am truly faithful.
Your love being which made me run out of wisdom and asceticism,
What way to school or to the moseque of hypocracy I have?
Be the slave of the cup of wine favoured by the cupbearer,
That whatever it might be, drawn from that pleasant face.
Oh! the breeze of love tell the charming Beloved,
Arise from your place that incurable pain I have.
That mysteries are there within this jar, and the cup bearer and this heart ravisher,
To the Beloved's soul swear that from the highly court I have.
Don't talk about the Solomon throne and the cup of Jam,
That the Khosrow and Key's crown, I the beggar have.

THE ALTER OF LOVE
Except the curve of the Beloved's eyebrow no altar I have,
Except her disunion I have no other worrying.

THE AGED MAN’S RESOLUTION
I have a puzzle, confidant I need,
I have a pain in my soul a cure I need.
If I have not seen the “Tūr” and I won't see,
In tur oh heart! Constant cup I need.
If I did not become a pure Sufi in the way of love,
From the aged traveller’s resolution a favour I need.
If the friend don't be faithful to dervish,
Heartily from Him the purity I will ask for.
Unveil your visage oh, beautiful heart ravisher,
In the darkness of night a guide I need.
Oh deeply immersed in thought! Cease thinking!
A selfless lover I need.
You are within my soul and I can’t find your visage,
You are visible upon the palm’s branch, an invisible palm’s branch I need.
Close up this book of love oh! Dervish,
I have been drowned a captain’s hand I need.

THE LOVERS’ SANCTUM
Pleasant that day when from this cage released I will be,
From the beloved’s separation, released and happy I will be.
I put my head upon the beloved’s step in the sanctum of love,
I put my lips upon your sweet lips, Farhad I will be.
I traverse the tavern’s way and I reach the old age,
By the inspiration of the tavernelder lighthearted I will be.
I hope that one day I attend the lovers' sanctum,
Delightful, joyous and merry I will be.
Neither in the tavern I am let in nor in the mosque I have room,
Tell the beloved to provide some means to guide me.

THE ENCAMPMENT OF LOVE
Due to her going I must tear off my garment,
To what incentive can I cure the heart's pain.
Open the tavern's door to me so that for a moment,
I confide confabulation in the wine and the wineimbiber as a confidant.
From my confabulation being revealed, you prevent,
That the tavern elder's heart I tear out of bereavement.
Thanks to the vat that for the sake of its sympathy,
In the scene of your love I make mortar out of the occult.
One day I will come out of her love's encampment,
I make wander, from her abode, all the residents.
Oh! The unknown; being everywhere idol, appear!
So that through heart I slap my face.

THE BELOVED'S SMELL
The wailings that due to the Beloved's sorrow I heave,
Is the sigh which from the burning heart I am crying.
Tell the bewitching Beloved: Take up the veil,
For due to the disunion of your moonlike face I am suffering.
Let Mansoor's cry reaches the friend,
On the gallows among the rosecheeked I am crying.
Oh cupbearer, pour the wine into my cup that the separation of the Beloved,
Is a heavy burden as an impediment I am carrying.
You said that a friend opens the door to a friend,
This is the new yearning I am deeply suffering.
Don't underestimate the Magian elder's cottage,
The fragnance of the Beloved from there I am smelling.
Who is the wayfarer looking for in this course?
To the alley and into the markert the Beloved I am pulling.

THE BELOVED’S BAR
Now that to me the tavern’s door is closed,
It had better my own sorrow to the wineseller will be told.
I am mad about that cupbearer and the love’s cup,
I am in love with that beautiful face.
Like the moth we consume by the candle,
I am Majnoon and wandering on the love’s road.
Whom do I tell the secret of my sad heart,
I am thirsty and feel lik having a cup of wine from that old jar.
Take away the book from my side and fetch me cup of wine,
So that I seek whatever I can not find in all books.
The complicated course of science and wisdom I quit,
So that I get admission by the beloved for my curved hair.

THE LOVE MYSTERY
Of the interests of the deceptive we are unaware,
Of the sages we are unaware.
The wise of our passionate state are unaware,
Of the learned’s futility we are unaware.
Of the lovers of her features there is no news in both worlds,
What can we do that about the unaware we are unaware.
The love’s secret is covered in te view of the secret revealers,
Of the scandal of these slanderes we are unaware.
Senselessness, intoxication and the taverndwelling of love,
We can not claim to be unaware of the wayfarers.
Give me a cup with your own hand, you the cause of love,
Of the others’ joy any gay we are unaware.

THE HEART’S KA‘BAH
As soon as from the existent world into nonexistence we crawled,
We heartily cut off from everything but the beloved.
Tell the caravan “Come back, cease your journey to ka‘bah”,
We saw the beloved intoxicated, out of the house being intoxicated.
Why do you call “Here am I” on the ignorant campanions!
We heard “Here am I” from the wine goblet in his sanctum.
Oh modest sufis! How long will you be covered?
The selfcovering in nonexistence we splitted.
Oh the chamberlain of the Ka‘bah draw off the curtain,
For we unveiled the heart’s Ka‘bah.
Cupbearer pour the wine into the cups of the rivals,
The love wine from her hand we tasted.

PAIN SUFFERER
We are loveborn and pain increasing,
With the claimant hermit of the mosque, we are fighting.
We did not make any agreement with the rivals to find him,
With the unaware we refused compromising.
Within your fire khalillike we were crawling,
We are the unique and noble in your bode for the lovers' abattoir.
Intoxicated and immoderate in the tavern we mixed with the drunkards,
In idol temple with the idlestricken we are united in a manly way.
In the circle of selflost ones, we resemble red roses,
In the leechnatured ones we are with the yellow face colouring.
Being sickly we joined the dishevelledheart ones,
We are icecold among the scholarly.
Against sufi, calandar and darvish we are fighting,
Coupled with the intoxicaded, the lost ones we are wandering.
We keep our states inside, we keep ourselves to ourselves,
We, the homeless ones, are afflicted by pain.

THE EVERLASTING CUP
We are the lover’s creation and the cup’s adopted son,
We are perfect in sacrificing and being drunkard for the beloved.
Lovelorn of the tavern and the shame's victim we are,
We are slaves at the court of the Magian elder.
While being the beloved’s cohabitant, we are suffering from her separation,
We are drowned in union and are in everlasting separation.
Poor and simple, but involved in colour wear,
We are unknown but looking for reputation.
With the Sufi, mystic and dervish we are in war,
With the science, philosophy and speech we have altercation.
We are isolated from the people and from school separated,
We are rejected by the knowledgeable and hated by the common.
We back the existence and the existence obtainer,
We have accompanied nonexistence from the very beginning.

THE HIDDEN TREASURE
To the tavern, lameniting and moaning, I have come,
Of the Sufi's trickery desperate I have become.
Tell the Sheikh "Close the door of school that I,"
With all your clamour and altercation fed up with the life I have become.
Unseal the jar oh! elder that at your court,
Joyfully, dancing, I have come.
No problem is solved unless by the beloved's coquetry,
At her door dishevelled state I have come.
Everywhere is the Beloved's abode as my beloved is everywhere,
Then from idole temple to Ka‘bah how have I come?
Reveal the mystery, open the knot, and solve the puzzle,
That from this desert exhausted I have come.
So as to move from nothing to everything,
Whimsically to covet the hidden treasure I have come.

THE SEASON OF JOY
Dancing to the Beloved's abode I have come,
Joyfully in search of the Tar's melody I have come.
The whole life's issue is worth waiting for your petty glance,
For that petty glance with a bawling heart I have come.
The wine from your delicate hand in this spring,
The soul is enlivening, that's why in this season I have come.
Where has the minstrel of love gone in this joyful time,
As for the sake of his jolliness intoxicated I have come.
Open the door of the tavern as from the lover's abattoir,
In desire of that tulipfigured I have come.
I tore the pretentious garment to be released from the snare of calamity,
I was released, then in search of the Beloved I have come.
For watching the purity of your face oh! the heart's Ka‘bah,
For the purity behind and towards the city of the Beloved I have come.

THE SUN BEAM
Good tidings oh! The bird of the turf that the spring has returned,
The time of drinking and necking has returned.
The time of the grieving and wilting is over,
Appealing to the beloved returned.
Whithered and the afflicted ended,
The lives with multicolour shades has returned.
The yellow colour upon the turf removed and disappeared,
The garden due to the sun's ray was enlivend.
The cupbearer and the tavern, the minstrel and dancing have returned,
In search of the Beloved's tress have returned.
If you happen to pass by the school "tell the Sheikh,"
For getting your lecture, that tulipface returned.
Cease the santimony in this joyful season,
As to our ears the melody of "TAR" has returned.

THE INTOXICATION OF LOVE
The door of the tavern to everybody is open still,
The soreheart is still suffering.
In this intoxication and inebriety there is love,
Knocking at the door of existance because of exigency is still.
Seperation from the Beloved is inevitable, be silent!
As the servant at her door is kind to the inferior still.
Don't reveal confidence except to the intoxicated Beloved,
Because in this stage she is condidant still.
Give up the greediness and vagaries,
The lover's hands towards her is stretching still.
I, the brokenheart, am not able to reach the beloved,
I can do nothing as she is still acting coquetry and coying.
Oh! The morning breeze! If you pass through her abode,
Take away the perfume, as she is perfume maker composing still.

THE MIRROR OF THE SOUL
Having devoted my life, to the door of the tavern I have come,
Having ignored the two world's entirely I have come.
The soul which is the mirror of the life in the realm of existence,
Having thrown the stone to the mirror of the soul, I have come.
As I did not find out the secret of the life from the realm of existence,
In the hiding place in search of the hidden sypress I have come.
Your face's epyphany without seeking the favour of anybody is the goal,
Therefore such a long way from the coast to the coast I have come.
Help me oh Elias that in this darkness,
In search of the source of the elixir of life I have come.
Do me a favour! Oh! friend that I ignored the world,
To your abode anxiously I have come.
Be cheerful about the result, oh Hindī, because,
To the elder of the mystical path through the good fortune way I have come.

THE CONFIDANT OF THE SECRETS
Do you ever know that the wretched, entangled in love with you I am,
With the entire soul and heart the cause of warning your market I am.
Any oppression you do to me, I accept, willingly,
Swear to God your lover, your faithful lover I am.
The strand of your hair finaly snared me,
Captivated by the curve of your hair and the strand of your hair I am.
Oh owl! Stop talking about your ruined nest,
As in this circle the central point of your compasses I am.
The mystic have covered the Beloved's features,
Mad about seeing you unveiled.
The lovers will reveal the secret of your obsession,
Come to me as the confidant of your confidance I am.
Unveil your face in front of this feeble old fellow,
Up to the last breath with my whole soul the fond of seeing you I am.

THE HIDING PLACE OF THE MYSTERIES
To the door of the tavern needy I have come,
To the disiples of the mystical path to perform the prayer I have come.
I have no idea of the hiding place of the mysteries,
To the Magianelder's door, the owner of the mystery I have come.
I was expelled from your abode disgracefully,
From the desert with a heart sore I have come.
The Sufi and his own patched garment, the ascetic and his own prayer rug,
Towards the Magian monastery while playing music I have come.
With the sorrowful heart from monastery I went to mosque,
Hopefully with wailing I have come,
As the light of your visage as to make pandemonum in both worlds,
To each particle with a hundred billing and cooing I have come.

THE WINE OF SOBRIETY
Take the cup and take off the hypocricy garment,
To the hypocritical Sheikh the alter.
Make aware the tavernelder of our state,
To take away hangover out of our soul with a goblet.
The casket for begging caused honour for us,
Oh charming Beloved! increase our honour,
We repeat whatever the calender whispers,
With a glance pet the old stipendiary.
Don't talk about the fatal poison of my rival,
You know how I suffered from this snake spotted snake.
Embracing the Beloved enlivened me,
In her separation there is neither embrace nor petting.
Warn the tavern elder about my grieve,
That the cupbearer made me sober by giving a goblet wine.

THE CLOAK OF INDIGENCE
At the door of the tavern while I am dancing you will see me,
Gamboling like the Calandars you will see me.
By that cup of wine again intoxicated I will be,
Unconsious, mocked by the old and the youth you will see me.
I will dash out of school and the monastery,
The hermit of the shade of that graceful sypress you will see me.
From th residence of existence I will make a journey,
Towards the nonexistence moving out you will see me.
I will take off the cloak of indigence all at once,
Shame of this wornout cloak clearly you will see.
I will drink wine from the goblet of the disappointed,
From the entire territory of both worlds free you will see me.

THE LOVELORN LOVER
Thanks be to the jar's head, as showed the way to me,
The cupbearer, holding a cup in hand, made me aware.
I became the door keeper of the lovers' tavern,
The intoxicated lover apponted me the door keeper.
My whole being be sacrificed to the wineselling idol,
That through a single sip the emiment Khosrow Jam made me.
Your shining moon face oh, the cause of joy!
Swear to God that needless of the sun and the moon made me.
You bestowed a green leaf from the garden of your visage,
From all the deviant paradise dwellers, released me.
To whom should I say the grief of the sorehearted lover,
That all his secrets within the inside let free.

BEAM OF BEAUTY
The Satan tried to do harm to me but did good,
He took me out of the paradaise to the Beloved bound me.
He intended to dismiss me from the paradise, to humiliate me,
The love appeared and beyond the territory and angels flew.
The cupbearer came to make me unconscious with the cup of wine,
The unconsciousness caused me leave the universe and enlivened.
Your beauty beam cast the life and extincted it,
Love came and cured the whole pains.
Your amourous glance into the soul of the lover lights such fire,
That the manifestation to the Moses Amron did.
Tell Avicenna to the Mount Sina was not allowed,
The one that was amazed by your amazing reasoning.

THE HEART’S WITNESS
Taking cup from your delicate hand is not a sin,
Except upon your abode oh! friend no other shelter there is.
The doors of the hope are closed to me from all directions,
Except the door of the tavern no hope of finding any way.
The one who sips the wine of your love,
The whole universe to him is nothing but a blade of straw.
If you don’t glance at the circle of the rogues,
Swear to your glance that in that circle no glance there is.
Sacrifice one’s life to the wineselling idol in whose opinion,
The existence and nonexistence, slave and king there is not.
As you are the unique expert, pay attention,
To the patient whose pain but sigh and sorrows, there is not.
I am in love, the sorehearted lover due to the beloved’s separation,
In my hand except the sorrowful heart no other witness there is.

THE KA‘BAH OF LOVE
There was no trace of my beloved on the temple,
Within the Ka‘bah also, no manifestation of her there was.
In the cloister of that rosecheecked no mention there is,
In the monastery and in the sanctuary no words of her there was.
Theology’s school nothing but clamour there is,
In the court no account of her there was.
I left for the sag's residence as to find him,
I observed the words all were conceptions.
Being amazed I joined the rows of the calandars,
There was nothing but the eulogy of Calandar.
A drop of wine from your cup oh charming beloved!
Conveys whatever that in the whole world there was not.
Acted coquetry once and poured into the soul, a single spark of which,
In the heaven's court with the celectial was not.

THE KING OF LOVE
I within our heart the heat of love won’t infiltrate,
The king of love towards us glance did not.
I sacrificed my soul to the Beloved’s visitation,
How can make an apology, not anything left.
That head which was sacrificed to her visage,
Whatever was seen by the beloved was not head.
If Moses was not able to see His visage upon the branch of the tree,
Doubtlessly his tree of insight was barren.
If you burden love voluntarily, never mind!
Eithere the East or the West was not in the right place.
Having not knocked the door of her love, like the Queen,
We would not have been let into the Solomon's court.
If the bird of the sacred garden had obtained her union,
In the assembly of your lovers, wingless and featherless would not have been.

VEILED
This caravan towards you have been running from the very beninning,
Till eternity, too, towards you will be running.
Wandering and puzzled all are in your love drowning,
Impatient and unable in every corner are the restless.
Put aside your veil and show us your features,
So as to be revealed whatever all people for it are looking for.
O! Veiled in search of your visage,
All souls have lost hearts, and the hearts are annoyed.
In the tavern the rogues all are eagerly thinking of you,
Mentioning you at the door of the taverns are mooning.
Oh friend! You aim at my sorrowful heart,
The arrow and the bow are your eyelashes and your eyebrows.

THE INTOXICATION OF NONEXISTENCE
In the presence of Sheikh of the Beloved no mention there was,
In the monastery from that idol no sign there was.
In the monastery, in the church in the sanctuary and in the mosque,
No trace of the rosecheeke cupbearer of the monk there was.
The confidence which is hidden in the cup of wine,
No dare reveal tothe rationalists there was.
The love sore within the heart of the intoxicated,
No chance to express to the sober there was.
The love way is the way that with the wayfarer of which,
There is a secret kept by the sober.
The intoxication of nonexistence in my soul,
Is undeniable in the courtroom.
Don’t be sober and follow the intoxicated,
Because in the row of the sober no visitation there was.

THE MANNER OF LOVE
The separation came and from the eyes took away the light,
If the friend does not treat cruelly what is the use of his friendship?
The dawn of the prosperous morning approached the night of which,
The unique Beloved for entering the sanctum gave us the permission.
The curer for my pain is that cruel rosecheeked,
To me no doors of the monastery made open.
Eversince that I forgot myself,
To the temple I was led by the manner of love.
On the Resurrection Day when the good people are sent to paradise,
None of the lovers of the mystical path, will be.
If one day about the mystic and the wayfarer there is a word,
Make sure it will be futile.

THE OBLITRATION SEA
I wish one day at your abode living I were,
In which happiness, sorrows and the heart’s desire were.
A knot within your tress in the hand is a wish,
The problem solver of any difficulty was.
Last night when due to your separation the heart was as dark as the underworld,
Your recalling was as a candle of that assembly.
The companions intoxicated, drunk, and unconscious,
Deprived those who like me in that essembly sober were.
Injustice and ignorance overwhelmed all rules,
Those who from themselves and the whole universe unaware were.
To the lovers the knowledge is considered veil, the veil,
Whoever went out of the veil infact ignonant was.
The lovers out of enthusiasm within the obliteration sea is drowning,
Unawere those who in the underworld of the coast were.
When I came to the love through mysticism I found out that,
Whatever we read and heard all in vain was.

REVEAL THE MYSTERY
The heart's bird is flapping so that from this cage out it may be,
The soul was so fatigue so that for a while like "Majnoon" may be.
Nobody knows the state of this sorehearted moth,
What would happen to it by the friend's candle existence.
The travellers packed their load and left this city,
Exhausted, in the bend of this alley, heart sick will be.
Reveal the mystery, take off the veil from your beautiful face,
That due to your disunion the eyes like [river] Jeyhoon will be.
The cupbearer! Remember the leftbehind thirsty ones,
Your cup will be brimful and your intoxication increased will be.
If one day the blessing clouds would pour wine instead of water,
the wildernesses will be intoxicated and the faces rosecoloured will be.

THE FIRE OF LOVE
Who can resist being distressed by that curly tress,
Any one sees you will fall in love.
Act coquetry, that all hearts are fond of you,
Act coquetry no Beloved like you can be found.
Show your face so that all the benevolent ones themselves ashamed,
If you unveil your face who won't be disgraced.
Inflame the fire of love, increase the sorrows of heart,
This sorrowful heart can not help becoming sad.
There is no remedy except burning from the fire of love,
Cast to the heart an everlasting fire.
There is no particle that through your mercy the savana won't be,
There is not a drop that through your liking the sea won't be.
Upon your abode the soul will put the head, Oh! friend!
The soul has no value unless it is sacrificed to your beautiful face.

THE UNION DAY
Don’t worry, the separation period towards its ending is going,
This languor which will be over for us the winedrinkers.
Unveiling from her own face,
Starts amourously glancing thereby the grief out of the heart and soul is going.
The nightingale upon the stems of flower appears,
The rook, deeply ashamed, out of the garden is going.
The assembly owing to her face’s light will be resplendent,
Wahtever, except the mention of the Beloved, out of the rogues' memory is going.
Because of appearing of her sunlike face the clouds disappear,
The strutting sypress's face will be unveiled.
Oh friend! Good tidings that the appointment is nearing,
The union day is coming the separation period is going.

THE CHAIN OF HEART
Except your roselike face the hope to nowhere else there is,
The pain is the love pain, except you no healing there is.
I am the slave of your tress, no aid there is,
I am on the way to your abode no guide there is.
The ringlet of your tress is the chain of my sorrowful heart,
Except your visage no other cure for my heart there is.
The pure Sufi won’t go out of this tavern,
For except the lovers’ cottage, no purity there is.
Be the hermit of the idol’s abode since in the manner of love,
Kissing the Beloved’s face is not considered a guilt.
Be the servant of the Magi's elder for, at love school,
Except the cupholding idol no other commandor there is.

MANIFESTATION OF LOVE
Take off the veil that your friend I am,
I am in love, the lover of your face I am.
Act coquetry, glance, talk,
Oh my soul! In love with your speech I am.
Call on me, while I am in bed,
Sorehearted, your love sick I am.
Through your union loosen the obsession from my heart,
Appear yourself to me as fond of you I am.
The anxious lover I am,
Intoxicated, dying to see you I am.
Whether you kill or pet me oh! friend,
In love with you, your faithful lover, I am.
Whoever I meet, is your buyer,
The buyer of your buyer, I am.

DESIROUS OF THE BELOVED
For the desire of my Beloved I sacrified the life of my own,
I abandoned home and my family.
There were so many friends in my home town,
I separated the desire for you from that for the others.
I had a nest in my own garden,
Your love made me abandon my nest.
I thought you were faithful to me,
Otherwise I would not have come out of my garden.

THE SHADE OF THE SYPRESS
Her eyebrow and her eyelashes the arrow and the arch are still,
Her ringlet tress is odorous still.
We are running our own business still,
She is busy ravishing the heart still.
We are trying to follow her sypress shade still,
From me, the sorehearted she is absent still.
There is neither a head nor life to be offered to her,
She is all spirit and soul still.
I, the sorehearted one, uponher candleface,
Her comely face was visible and is visible still.
The heavenly ones are beyond the stage to be proud of us,
The tale of ‘allam alasmā is being told still.

THE CONFIDANT OF LOVE
Oh! How great that in both worlds was hoisted the flag of love,
The human being, the angel and the pixi have been wondering about the turns and the twists of love.
The angels are moaning and crying for the Beloved,
The heavenly angels beating their heads and their chests in grief of love.
The lovers are dashing in through the door and over the wall,
It's a rare secret visible from the strong door of love.
Don't be sad oh! frenzied heart that you won't be let in,
To the wayfarer there is no difference between the abundance or the shortage of love.
Give my message to the cruel rivals,
Except the intoxicated, me, nobody else is the confidant of love.

THE MORNING BRIDE
Tonight while you are sleeping beside me like a bride,
Verily from petting and necking avoid not.
Oh night! Let not appear the morning bride,
Tonight that so close is sleeping in my arm this bride.
I won't take my lips off her sugarsweet lips,
If I hear the dawn's announcement of "adhān" or beating the drum.
Oh God, block the morning way to the sun's face,
Make the "mu’adhdhin" keep on sleeping and the cock under the ground hide.
While you are with me just this single night, through affectionate and grace,
For the rest of the time, compensated if it were any chance.
Don't consider me a rogue if I want this night to meet the dawn,
If I could have taken a seat upon the seat of Solomon.
Hindī has come from India up to your residence,
How with the Shiraz kingship and Tus territory will be satisfied.

THE LOVE MANNERS
Drink a cup and at the door of the tavern happy be,
Remember the angle who caused success.
If you don’t have tamper in order to toil the mountain,
Due to the beloved's disunion happy like Farhad be.
Keep on wearing the slavery rings in the ears,
The sovereign of the existence and universe be.
Within the twisted tress of the songwriter cupbearer,
Wholeheartedly the bannerbearer of this premise be.
In manners of love, the trainee of the tavernelder, be.
Proud for the whole people, master be.
The intoxicated won't buy his position for a penny,
Be it Khosrow of the era or KeyQubād.
If you become the pleasant child of the tavern,
Let the territory of Qeysar and Kasrā with squandered be.

THE SONG OF INSPIRATION
Wearing cloak, I had some wine in the tavern,
So that I lose both tranquility and sobriety.
I won't be cured by the Sheikh's breath,
I have to complain to the wineselling idol.
Neither the researcher was aware nor the mystic had a trace,
From now on my hand and the skirt of a silent elder.
The Sufi and his privacy, and the scholar with his sanctum,
We and the abode of the puzzled idol homeless.
I passed through the door of the school, monastery and the tavern,
So that I become the slave at her place's door.
Don't listen to the roar of sufi and dervish,
So that, the song of inspiration reaches your soul.

THE MAGIAN ELDER
My vow with the old wineseller,
Last year, I renewed the year former night.
I deplore that in this spring season,
The friends are, all in garden but I am silent.
I too, with two flowerfigured silverlike,
It is a pity that this pleasantry Godgiven life,
Upon wearing the hyporacy patched garment and the offering food I squander.
I appeal to a moonlike idol,
As I was not able to gain anything from the Sheikh in, the patched garment wearer.
I gained nothing from the school's cacophony,
Except the tragic words after so much clamour.
Now sitting in the corner of the tavern with a delicate beloved,
I'm sitting and closing my eyes and my ears to these people.
You won't hear any more tales from Hindī,
Except the words about the purity of wine and those of the wineseller.

THE FIRE OF SEPARATION
Where to do the heartbereft go, uttering his needs?
To the degenerate how can he reveal my secrets.
With the wise unaware of love sore,
Through the one's mooning no doors will be opened.
Now that the beloved did not let me enter her abode,
We are engaged with our needs and she is with her coquetry.
Tell her a glance through giving a favour,
Make to the devoted lover of her own.
We are the lovers and consumed by the fire of separation,
Pour some water with lover petting hand of your own.
I am desperate with pain, and no one can remedy,
Be graceful with your remedial favour.
Tell the zoroastrian priests, our way is different from yours,
We are with our "ayāz" and you be with the prayer of your own.

HAPPY ENDING
Fill up my cup with wine oh cupbearer,
Removing from my soul the desire for fame and dishonour.
Fill up my cup with the sort of wine that can ruin my soul,
And extinguish the score of deceit and snare.
The sort of wine which releases my soul from its own chain,
Taking my reins, it deprives me from my power.
The sort of wine which in sactum of the rogues not observing the forbidden,
Smashes my prostration and makes my rising fracture.
You were not within the sanctity boundary of the tavern’s rosecheeked,
That from any aperture I enter, my bridle will be caught by a flower.
I will join the selfless elders, perhaps,By means of wine,
They will empty out my mind of thoughts, so vain and rare.
Oh! You the messenger of the lightlyburden of the mortality,
Take my praise and regards to that area's sea commander.
With the goblet I ended this mortality in mortality letter,
"Watch the Happy Ending." You tell of the cloister elder.
